---
layout: post
title:  "Thoughts on fine art and non-fungible tokens (NFTs)"
date:   2021-03-15
---

## Motivation

In what is perhaps the most "2021" post (YMMV), I have been thinking about non-fungible tokens (NFTs) recently and the fine arts. Earlier this month, Christie's ran an auction of a digital collage whose hammer price was over $69m USD, by Beeple.

While composing this post I have been listening in on a live discussion with the CEO of Sotheby's and other top art market people talking about running future auctions of "digital-focused art" on the Clubhouse app. Sotheby's essentially just ran a panel about this that acted as free advertising for their upcoming first auction including an NFT. I missed the beginning of the discussion but they mentioned that they were working directly with an artist for this auction which is quite a rare phenomenon for them.

I would like to consider some of the current findings I have of this very nascent but very trendy topic.

## Marketplace

Almost overnight, it seems like NFTs are experiencing undergoing an inflationary big-bang moment right now. Press has started picking up stories about high NFT valuations and the most prestigious art institutions in the world are lapping up market-making opportunities and lending the credence of their storied history and art/collectible expertise to legitimize NFTs. NFTs still are very speculative but the stamp of social legitimacy lent to them by Christie's and Sotheby's is going to have a massive trickle-down effect into museums, galleries, collectors, and artists. As celebrities participate it will become mainstream and a mass marketplace of producers, consumers, market-makers, and investors of NFTs will take shape in a sustainable fashion. Right now this is just the first period of exponential growth of many as different step functions of market entry and participation come to fruition.

## Participants

Here's a quick breakdown of some of the current and future particpants in the NFT space. This is likely to become very incomplete and not at all future-proof.

### Investors

From what I can see, the majority of interested parties in NFTs are a combination of folks in tech and finance who want to invest in NFTs and trade NFTs as capital for capital gains. Given the nature of NFTs this is not surprising since the folks who are most interested in crypto-currencies and blockchain technologies are also folks in tech and finance. I think that their motivation is to create a marketplace in NFTs that is large and liquid, like a securities exchange for equities or derivatives, but with a single token available.

## Artists



## Brokers/dealers

## Investors


## Value



## Art historical perspective

Let's go back to the basics of modern Art History and Walter Benjamin's famous essay, *The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction*. While we're at it, let's consider Clement Greenberg's classic essay, *Avant-Garde and Kitsch*.

Synthesizing the NFT world with these two essays suggests a few points. Markets for (currently plentiful and inexpensive) digitally-generated NFTs are lending themselves to Kitsch. Betty Boop cat clocks on the wall and Coca Cola Americana that was ubiquitous in its time and valuable now not for its uniqueness but for its rarity in still existing. This kind of mass-produced art speaks to people. Earlier this month some digital 24x24 pixel art sold for around $7m USD (I think it was officially sold for something like 4200 Ethereum) where there only 1 of a limited set of 10,000 such avatars. Most of them, though individually unique, are not as rare as some. It's like trading cards. In the NFT world, we are awash with commodified, digitally generated art that may be created programatically without human involvement in each work. Interestingly, the rarity of some of these unique works in larger collections is also generated programatically.

What is avante-garde is not the medium or uniqueness of each work of art (or even entire collections), but the intersection of the art that is existent in the nascent NFT marketplace. It is a new system of exchange of value.

